refactor!: switch to src layout, use poetry, add developer docs (DEV-1523) (#276)
dasch-swiss/dsp-tools: README.md

The concrete advantages of the src layout are:

- import parity
- The tests run against the package as it will be installed by the user - not against the situation in the 
  developer's repository.
- It is obvious to both humans and tools if a folder is a package to be distributed, or not.
- The editable installation is only able to import files that will also be importable in a regular installation.
- For the developer, the working directory is the root of the repository, so the root will implicitly be included in 
  `sys.path`. Users will never have the same current working directory than the developer. So, removing the packages 
  from the root by putting them into `src` prevents some practices that will not work on the user's machine. 

These things are better explained by the following, often-cited readings:

- [https://blog.ionelmc.ro/2014/05/25/python-packaging](https://blog.ionelmc.ro/2014/05/25/python-packaging)
- [https://hynek.me/articles/testing-packaging](https://hynek.me/articles/testing-packaging)
- [https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/src-layout-vs-flat-layout](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/src-layout-vs-flat-layout)

> ### Publishing/distribution

Author: This paragraph was just moved here, without modification.

Publishing is automated with GitHub Actions and should _not_ be done manually. Please follow the
[Pull Request Guidelines](https://docs.dasch.swiss/latest/developers/dsp/contribution/#pull-request-guidelines). If done
correctly, when merging a pull request into `main`, the `release-please` action will create or update a release 
PR. This PR will follow semantic versioning and update the change log. Once all desired features are
merged, the release can be executed by merging this release pull request into `main`. This will trigger actions that
create a release on GitHub and on PyPI.

Please ensure you have only one pull request per feature.

### Publishing manually

> 

Author: This paragraph was moved here, but WITH modifications. Unfortunately, the GitHub Diff is not the best here...

# DSP-TOOLS - DaSCH Service Platform Tools

<!--bookmark-start-for-mkdocs-include-markdown-plugin-->
DSP-TOOLS is a command line tool that helps you to interact with the DaSCH Service Platform API. This document is 
intended for developers who want to work with the code of DSP-TOOLS. 

| Hint                                                                                                                                                       |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | If you are a normal user of DSP-TOOLS, consult the [end user documentation](https://docs.dasch.swiss/latest/DSP-TOOLS) instead of this technical document. |

Reviewer: Could you reformulate this? "If you are a normal user" sounds a bit unfriendly to me and I wouldn't know what sort of user I am if I consulted this page for the first time. How about something like "This is a technical documentation, for the end user documentation please visit ...".

Author: Ok, it's reformulated

for all processes, and to keep the number of configuration files at a minimum. 

There are many configuration and metadata files that can be found on the top level of a Python repository. The ones 
used in the DSP-TOOLS repository are:

| file           | purpose                                                                         |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| README.md      | Markdown-formatted infos for developers                                         |
| pyproject.toml | Modern configuration/metadata file replacing the deprecated files listed below  |
| .gitignore     | List of files not under version control (won't be uploaded to GitHub)           |
| .gitmodules    | DSP-TOOLS contains a Git submodule (more infos below)                           |
| CHANGELOG.md   | Markdown-formatted release notes (must not be edited by hand)                   |
| LICENSE        | Text file with the license how to use the source code of DSP-TOOLS              |
| Makefile       | Definition of commands that can be executed with `make [command]`               |

> | poetry.lock    | Pinned versions of all (sub-) dependencies, allows a deterministic installation |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| poetry.lock    | Pinned versions of all (sub-)dependencies, allows a deterministic installation |
```

> | mkdocs.yml     | Configuration of `mkdocs`, used to build the documentation webpage              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| mkdocs.yml     | Configuration of `mkdocs`, used to build the documentation webpages              |
```

In earlier times, there were some more configuration files, but thanks to poetry, they are not necessary anymore:

| Deprecated file      | Replaced by                             | Replaced by                                          |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| MANIFEST.in          | files to include into distribution      | pyproject.toml: [tool.poetry.include]                |
| setup.py             | project metadata, dependencies          | pyproject.toml                                       |
| setup.cfg            | configuration for setuptools            | pyproject.toml                                       |
| requirements.txt     | all (sub-) dependencies                 | pyproject.toml: [tool.poetry.dependencies]           |
| dev-requirements.txt | additional dependencies for development | pyproject.toml: [tool.poetry.group.dev.dependencies] |
| Pipfile              | direct dependencies                     | pyproject.toml: [tool.poetry.dependencies]           |

> | Pipfile.lock         | pinned dependencies                     | poetry.lock                                          |

Reviewer: I would not document this in the readme. IMHO, the readme should only contain the actual state, not past things that are not relevant anymore.

into a `setup.py` file. 

But this is cumbersome and error-prone, so there was a time when [pipenv](https://pipenv.pypa.io/en/latest/) was the 
way to go: Pipenv introduced the important distinction between (a) dependencies necessary to run the application, 
(b) dependencies necessary for development, and (c) sub-dependencies, i.e. dependencies of your dependencies. Another 
useful concept of pipenv is the distinction between a human-friendly list of (mostly unpinned) direct dependencies and 
a machine-friendly definition of exact (pinned) versions of all dependencies.  
But since pipenv has no packaging functionality, it was necessary to sync the dependency definitions from `Pipfile` to  
`requirements.txt` and `setup.py`.  

`setup.py`, too, is problematic, especially 
[calling `setup.py sdist bdist_wheel`](https://blog.ganssle.io/articles/2021/10/setup-py-deprecated.html#summary). 
Python projects should define their dependencies and metadata in the modern `pyproject.toml` file. So it is 
necessary to dynamically manage the dependencies in `pyproject.toml`. And poetry seems to be the only tool capable 

> of doing this.

Reviewer: Same as above, who would be the target user of this kind of documentation? I see that this can be interesting to know, but IMHO irrelevant to someone who wants to work with DSP-TOOLS.

#### Using poetry for dependency management

If you want to work on the code of DSP-TOOLS, you first have to do a `make install`, which will

 - install poetry with `curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -` (for Windows, see 
   [https://python-poetry.org/docs/](https://python-poetry.org/docs/))
 - execute `poetry install`, which will: 
     - create a virtual environment (if there isn't already one) 
     - install all dependencies (dev and non-dev) from `poetry.lock`. If `poetry.lock` doesn't exist, it installs 

>        the dependencies from `pyproject.toml`, and creates a new `poetry.lock`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       the dependencies from `pyproject.toml`, and creates a new `poetry.lock`
```

     - make an editable installation of DSP-TOOLS inside the virtual environment

There are two files defining the dependencies:

 - `pyproject.toml` lists the direct dependencies, ordered in two sections:
   - `[tool.poetry.dependencies]` lists the dependencies used to run the software.
   - `[tool.poetry.group.dev.dependencies]` lists the dependencies used for developing and testing.

>  - `poetry.lock` enables deterministic installations, by exactly pinning the version of all (sub-) dependencies. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `poetry.lock` enables deterministic installations, by exactly pinning the versions of all (sub-)dependencies. 
```

the virtual environment, the code of your local clone will be executed.

### Packaging 

All project metadata, together with the dependencies and the configuration of the packaging tool poetry, is defined in 
`pyproject.toml`. The authoritative resource on how to create this file is 
[https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata).

The table `[build-system]` of `pyproject.toml` tells frontend build tools what backend build tool to use. The backend 
doesn't need to be installed. It will be installed by the frontend in a temporary, isolated environment for use during 
the build process. DSP-TOOLS uses poetry as both frontend and backend.

What happens when a distribution package of DSP-TOOLS is created? Poetry creates two files in the `dist` folder: a `.
tar.gz` compressed archive (the sdist or source distribution) and a `.whl` file (a wheel). Both contain the contents of 
the `src` folder plus some metadata - they are equivalent. They are then uploaded to the 

> [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org/).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Python Package Index (PyPI)](https://pypi.org/).  
```

> When a user installs DSP-TOOLS via `pip install dsp-tools`, pip takes the sdist or the wheel, unpacks it, and copies 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user installs DSP-TOOLS with `pip install dsp-tools`, pip takes the sdist or the wheel, unpacks it, and copies 
```

it into the `site-packages` folder of the user's Python installation. As a result, the user has the same packages in 

> their `site-packages` folder as the `src` folder of the dsp-tools repository. In our case, this the `dsp_tools` package. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
his `site-packages` folder as the `src` folder of the DSP-TOOLS repository. In our case, this is the `dsp_tools` package. 
```

Since `site-packages` is on `sys.path`, the user can then import the package `dsp_tools` in his script.

#### Advantages of the src layout

Putting all packages into a `src` folder has an important consequence: It forces the developer to work with an 

> editable installation of his package. Why? Without editable installation, it is impossible to write correct import 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
editable installation of his package. Why? Without an editable installation, it is impossible to write correct import 
```

statements. `from src.package import module` will not work, because the user has `package` installed, not `src`. And 
relative imports like `import module` will not work either, because when the tests code (situated in a separate 
`test` folder) imports the actual code, the relative imports in the actual code fail. This is because relative imports 
depend on the location of the file that is run, not on the file that contains the import statement. 

The solution is to always have an editable installation of the package under development. Poetry does this 
automatically when you execute `poetry install`. This makes the package `dsp_tools` importable - just like on a 

> user's machine. And exactly this is the big advantage: With the src layout + editable installation, the setup on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user's machine. And exactly this is the big advantage: With the src layout and an editable installation, the setup on the 
```

> developer's machine is more similar to the user's setup than with any other project layout. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
developer's machine is more similar to the user's setup. 
```

> The concrete advantages of the src layout are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantages of the src layout are:
```

- import parity
- The tests run against the package as it will be installed by the user - not against the situation in the 
  developer's repository.
- It is obvious to both humans and tools if a folder is a package to be distributed, or not.

> - The editable installation is only able to import files that will also be importable in a regular installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The editable installation is only able to import modules that will also be importable in a regular installation.
```

- For the developer, the working directory is the root of the repository, so the root will implicitly be included in 

>   `sys.path`. Users will never have the same current working directory than the developer. So, removing the packages 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `sys.path`. Users usually won't have the same current working directory than a developer. So, removing the packages 
```

  from the root by putting them into `src` prevents some practices that will not work on the user's machine. 

> These things are better explained by the following, often-cited readings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more in-depth explanations, please visit the following pages:
```

- [https://blog.ionelmc.ro/2014/05/25/python-packaging](https://blog.ionelmc.ro/2014/05/25/python-packaging)
- [https://hynek.me/articles/testing-packaging](https://hynek.me/articles/testing-packaging)
- [https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/src-layout-vs-flat-layout](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/discussions/src-layout-vs-flat-layout)

> ### Publishing/distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Publishing and distribution
```
